Staging environment (#5267)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/deploy/deploy-environments.md

To learn different approaches to managing dbt Cloud environments and recommendations for your organization's unique needs, read [dbt Cloud environment best practices](/guides/set-up-ci).
::: 
 
Learn more about development vs. deployment environments in [dbt Cloud Environments](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments).

> There are three types of deployment environments that serve different needs:

Reviewer: @matthewshaver I suggest you delete "that serve different needs" as they are extra words.

> - **Production**: Environment for transforming data and building pipelines for production use.

Reviewer: @matthewshaver What do you think about adding more context and making the definitions more specific (@jtcohen6 might need to keep me honest as I'm not sure these are correct):

Production: Transform data and build pipelines for live usage in production systems. For example, you can transform customer data and generate reports for real-time analytics.

Staging: Test production tools with restricted access to actual production data. For example, you can test new data transformation scripts before deploying them to the production environment.

General:  Develop and deploy in this versatile environment that's not intended for final production workflows. You can experiment with new data models or conduct performance tests before moving them to production.

Reviewer 2: > Production: Transform data and build pipelines for live usage in production systems. For example, you can transform customer data and generate reports for real-time analytics.

It wouldn't be accurate to place emphasis on "live" / "real-time." The key difference is that Production is the only environment that is being referenced by downstream dashboards/reporting, applications, etc. This also contains real data, including (potentially) PII/PHI (personally identifiable information / personal health information)

> Staging: Test production tools with restricted access to actual production data. For example, you can test new data transformation scripts before deploying them to the production environment.

- "Test production tools" -> "Continuously deploy changes and verify reporting."
- Many companies (but not all) will have actually different/restricted data in Production and non-Production environments, where non-Prod = Staging + Development. Or, it's the same data but they leverage data warehouse capabilities to dynamically mask/filter it depending on who's querying.
- "For example, you can test new data transformation scripts before deploying them to the production environment." -> This is conceptually right, but I'd be inclined to say "new and changed dbt models" rather than "new data transformation scripts"

> General: Develop and deploy in this versatile environment that's not intended for final production workflows. You can experiment with new data models or conduct performance tests before moving them to production.

We are renaming "General" to "Other" in the UI. This is just a catch-all for customers who need to set up additional custom environments. There is nothing special about these, and they do not carry the same functionality or canonical meaning as "Production" or "Staging."

- **Staging**<Lifecycle status='beta' />: Environment for working with production tools while limiting access to production data.
- **General**: General use environment for deployment development. 

We highly recommend using the `Production` environment type for the final, source of truth deployment data. There can be only one environment marked for final production workflows and we don't recommend using a `General` environment for this purpose. 

## Create a deployment environment

> To create a new dbt Cloud development environment, navigate to **Deploy** -> **Environments** and then click **Create Environment**. Select **Deployment** as the environment type. If you already have a development environment, the option will be greyed out.

Author: ```suggestion
To create a new dbt Cloud deployment environment, navigate to **Deploy** -> **Environments** and then click **Create Environment**. Select **Deployment** as the environment type. The option will be greyed out if you already have a development environment.
```

</WHCode>

## Staging environment <Lifecycle status='beta' />

:::note

> Currently in limited availability beta.

Author: @jtcohen6  Do we want to put contact info so customers can ask to join, or is this limited to select clients for the time being?

Reviewer 2: We're starting with a limited beta for now, but with plans to roll out to wider availability soon. For now, let's say: "Contact Support or your account team if you're interested in beta access."

> Currently in limited availability beta.

Author: ```suggestion
Currently in limited availability beta. Contact support or your account team if you're interested in beta access.
```

:::

> Staging environments are a useful way to grant developers access to deployment workflows and tools while limiting access to production data. Staging environments are configured with their own, long living branch (for example, `staging`) that may be very similar to `main` in many ways, but limits the data that the developers can access. 

Author: ```suggestion
Staging environments are useful ways to grant developers access to deployment workflows and tools while controlling access to production data. They are configured with their own long-living branch (for example, `staging`) that may be very similar to `main` in many ways while potentially limiting the data the developers can access. 
```

> Staging environments are a useful way to grant developers access to deployment workflows and tools while limiting access to production data. Staging environments are configured with their own, long living branch (for example, `staging`) that may be very similar to `main` in many ways, but limits the data that the developers can access. 

Reviewer 2: > that may be very similar to `main` in many ways

Usually _ahead_ of `main`, with staged releases from `staging` to `main`. There's a good overview of how this all works here: https://docs.getdbt.com/blog/the-case-against-git-cherry-picking

> but limits the data that the developers can access.

The mechanism for this is different. This needs to be applied **within** the data warehouse, by configuring Staging to point to:
- a different data warehouse instance entirely (different Snowflake account, BigQuery project, etc) — via env vars or Extended Attributes
- a different set of source schemas (e.g. using env vars within project code definitions of `sources`)

> Ideally, the workflows would move upstream from Developer environment -> Staging environment -> Production environment with developer branches feeding in to the staging branch, then ultimately `main`. In many cases, `main` and `staging` branches will be identical after a merge, and remain that way until the next batch of changes from `developer` branches are ready to be elevated. We recommend setting branch protection rules on `stagin` similar to `main`.

Author: ```suggestion
Ideally, the workflows would move upstream from the Development environment -> Staging environment -> Production environment with developer branches feeding into the staging branch, then ultimately `main`. In many cases, the `main` and `staging` branches will be identical after a merge and remain until the next batch of changes from the `development` branches are ready to be elevated. We recommend setting branch protection rules on `staging` similar to `main`.
```

> Ideally, the workflows would move upstream from Developer environment -> Staging environment -> Production environment with developer branches feeding in to the staging branch, then ultimately `main`. In many cases, `main` and `staging` branches will be identical after a merge, and remain that way until the next batch of changes from `developer` branches are ready to be elevated. We recommend setting branch protection rules on `stagin` similar to `main`.

Reviewer 2: typo: `stagin` &rarr; `staging`

### Create a staging environment 

> In the dbt Cloud, navigate to **Deploy** -> **Environments** and then click **Create Environment**. Select **Deployment** as the environment type. If you already have a development environment, the option will be greyed out.

Author: ```suggestion
In the dbt Cloud, navigate to **Deploy** -> **Environments** and then click **Create Environment**. Select **Deployment** as the environment type. The option will be greyed out if you already have a development environment.
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-configuring-dbt-cloud/create-staging-environment.png" width="85%" title="Create a staging environment" />

> The "dbt version" should match the version used in production. 

Reviewer 2: A year ago, I might have said: you could use a Staging environment to try out a newer dbt version

Now I'd say: given that we're going to be encouraging everyone to "Keep on latest version" very soon, I don't think we need this sentence here

> The "dbt version" should match the version used in production. 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Follow the steps outlined in [deployment credentials](#deployment-connection) to complete the remainder of the environment setup.

> // do we recommend specific credentials.

Author: @jtcohen6 Do we have recommendations on the credentials used for this?

Reviewer 2: We recommend that the data warehouse credentials are for a dedicated user / service principal (e.g. `DBT_CLOUD_PRODUCTION_USER`), not the credentials of any individual person

> // do we recommend specific credentials.

Author: ```suggestion
We recommend that the data warehouse credentials be for a dedicated user or service principal.
```

### Use cases

There are a variety of reasons to incorporate a staging environment into existing workflows, including (but not limited to):
- Securing the source of truth production environment
- Access control over sensitive data
- Limiting the amount of production data developers can access

> - Protecting data access using cross project refs (if staging environments are defined in those projects)

Reviewer 2: I think these are **needs & motivations** for having a Staging environment, and they really boil down to two:
1. Clear isolation between prod and non-prod data environments, if there is sensitive data in prod (or a lot of it)
2. Having an extra step to validate changes before they go live in prod

I think we need to mention explicitly on this page that the **use cases** of Staging environments are:
1. Development deferral (in projects with Staging envs)
2. Cross-project refs (to upstream project dependencies with Staging envs)
3. Discovery API + Explorer

while still accomplishing those needs/motivations

Ideally, the workflows would move upstream from the Development environment -> Staging environment -> Production environment with developer branches feeding into the staging branch, then ultimately `main`. In many cases, the `main` and `staging` branches will be identical after a merge and remain until the next batch of changes from the `development` branches are ready to be elevated. We recommend setting branch protection rules on `staging` similar to `main`.

### Create a staging environment 

In the dbt Cloud, navigate to **Deploy** -> **Environments** and then click **Create Environment**. Select **Deployment** as the environment type. The option will be greyed out if you already have a development environment.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-configuring-dbt-cloud/create-staging-environment.png" width="85%" title="Create a staging environment" />

Follow the steps outlined in [deployment credentials](#deployment-connection) to complete the remainder of the environment setup.

We recommend that the data warehouse credentials be for a dedicated user or service principal.

> ### Why use a staging environment

Author: @jtcohen6 let me know how this section looks. Feel free to make any changes or clarifications you feel necessary, and I'll get this out the door ASAP. If you'd like me to add screenshots of Explorer, could you take one and send it to me, please.

Reviewer 2: @matthewshaver Thank you! I just did another review, I will push up some changes so we can get this live ASAP. I'll use this screenshot for now:

<img width="1122" alt="Screenshot 2024-04-12 at 21 03 06" src="https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/13897643/1160e429-eebc-49e5-aedc-7cf6558eb6b9">

But please feel free to rip that out & replace with another one when we revisit this next week!

Author: Looks good! Submitting to my team

Staging environments provide a layer of separation between you development and production deployment environment. It isolates the prod and pre-prod data, which aids in protecting sensitive information and limiting access to large data sets. Developers can edit job definitions in the staging environment while production is limited to only those who need access. It also helps to have additional verification steps between development and deployment. 

> Let's say you have `Project A` and `Project B` and that `Project B` is downstream of `Project A` with cross-project refs configured in the models. When developers are working in the IDE for `Project B`, those refs will resolve to the staging environment of `Project A`, rather than production. You'll get the same results with those refs when jobs are run in the staging environment (or other non-production deployments). Only the production environment will reference the production data, isolating the environment and reducing the need to duplicate projects. 

Author: ```suggestion
Let's say you have `Project B` downstream of `Project A` with cross-project refs configured in the models. When developers work in the IDE for `Project B`, those refs will resolve to the staging environment of `Project A`, rather than production. You'll get the same results with those refs when jobs are run in the staging environment (or other non-production deployments). Only the production environment will reference the production data, isolating the environment and reducing the need to duplicate projects. 
```

> Let's say you have `Project A` and `Project B` and that `Project B` is downstream of `Project A` with cross-project refs configured in the models. With a staging environment configured in `Project A`, when developers are working in the IDE for `Project B`, those refs will resolve to the staging environment of `Project A`, rather than production. You'll get the same results with those refs when jobs are run in the staging environment (or other non-production deployments). Only the production environment will reference the production data, isolating the environment, reducing need to duplicate projects. 

Author: ```suggestion
Let's say you have `Project A` and `Project B` and that `Project B` is downstream of `Project A` with cross-project refs configured in the models. When developers are working in the IDE for `Project B`, those refs will resolve to the staging environment of `Project A`, rather than production. You'll get the same results with those refs when jobs are run in the staging environment (or other non-production deployments). Only the production environment will reference the production data, isolating the environment and reducing the need to duplicate projects. 
```

</WHCode>

## Staging environment <Lifecycle status='beta' />

:::note
Currently in limited availability beta. Contact support or your account team if you're interested in beta access.
:::

> Staging environments are useful ways to grant developers access to deployment workflows and tools while controlling access to production data. They are configured with their own long-living branch (for example, `staging`) that may be very similar to `main` in many ways while potentially limiting the data the developers can access. 

Reviewer: I suggest making this paragraph less wordy and more active so it's easier to read:
* "Use a staging environment to grant developers access to..." same with 2nd sentence.

We're using "main" here without really defining it. A newer-to-dbt user might be confused. Can you customize the main branch name? Maybe we can say _the primary branch (usually named `main`)_ or something similar. Here's [prior art for this](https://docs.getdbt.com/faqs/Environments/custom-branch-settings#development)

Ideally, the workflows would move upstream from the Development environment -> Staging environment -> Production environment with developer branches feeding into the staging branch, then ultimately `main`. In many cases, the `main` and `staging` branches will be identical after a merge and remain until the next batch of changes from the `development` branches are ready to be elevated. We recommend setting branch protection rules on `staging` similar to `main`.

> ### Create a staging environment 

Author: ```suggestion
### Create a staging environment 
```

In the dbt Cloud, navigate to **Deploy** -> **Environments** and then click **Create Environment**. Select **Deployment** as the environment type. The option will be greyed out if you already have a development environment.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-configuring-dbt-cloud/create-staging-environment.png" width="85%" title="Create a staging environment" />

Follow the steps outlined in [deployment credentials](#deployment-connection) to complete the remainder of the environment setup.

We recommend that the data warehouse credentials be for a dedicated user or service principal.

> ### Why use a staging environment

Reviewer: I'd expect to see the "why use this feature" before "Create a staging environment." Also, I'm not convinced this needs to be its own section. These [4 lines](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/5267/files#diff-b3b10e4b30d41964b19ae127ca5e8a640eb6000e03de275b6bec4c21b03ab142R216-R218) might fit better after the paragraph beginning with "[Ideally, the](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/5267/files#diff-b3b10e4b30d41964b19ae127ca5e8a640eb6000e03de275b6bec4c21b03ab142R201)"

There are two primary motivations for using a Staging environment:
1. An additional validation layer before changes are deployed into Production. You can deploy, test, and explore your dbt models in Staging.
2. Clear isolation between development workflows and production data. It enables developers to work in metadata-powered ways, using features like deferral and cross-project references, without accessing data in production deployments.

:::info Coming soon: environment-level permissions
Provide developers with the ability to create, edit, and trigger ad hoc jobs in the Staging environment, while keeping the Production environment locked down.
:::

> Let's say you have `Project B` downstream of `Project A` with cross-project refs configured in the models. When developers work in the IDE for `Project B`, cross-project refs will resolve to the Staging environment of `Project A`, rather than production. You'll get the same results with those refs when jobs are run in the Staging environment. Only the Production environment will reference the Production data, keeping the data and access isolated without needing separate projects.

Reviewer: Can Project B and A paragraphs be put in a "Staging example" section?

> Let's say you have `Project B` downstream of `Project A` with cross-project refs configured in the models. When developers work in the IDE for `Project B`, cross-project refs will resolve to the staging environment of `Project A`, rather than production. You'll get the same results with those refs when jobs are run in the Staging environment. Only the Production environment will reference the Production data, keeping the data and access isolated without the need for separate projects.

Author: ```suggestion
Let's say you have `Project B` downstream of `Project A` with cross-project refs configured in the models. When developers work in the IDE for `Project B`, cross-project refs will resolve to the Staging environment of `Project A`, rather than production. You'll get the same results with those refs when jobs are run in the Staging environment. Only the Production environment will reference the Production data, keeping the data and access isolated without needing separate projects.
```

If `Project B` also has a Staging deployment, then references to unbuilt upstream models within `Project B` will resolve to that environment, using [deferral](/docs/cloud/about-cloud-develop-defer), rather than resolving to the models in Production. This saves developers time and warehouse spend, while preserving clear separation of environments.

> Finally, the staging environment has its own view in [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects), enabling you to have a full view of your prod and pre-prod data.

Author: ```suggestion
Finally, the Staging environment has its own view in [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects), giving you a full view of your prod and pre-prod data.
```
